32
Chapter 3: Methodology
3.1 Chapter Introduction
Based on the research gaps enumerated at the end of Chapter 2, this chapter
anchors the research methodological blueprint for this project. There is a seamless
transition from the conceptual argument for a multimodal edge AI system to its
engineering blueprint in this chapter. The manner of research development, system
architecture, various components, and validation process of the edge AI system will all
be discussed in this chapter.
Based on the objectives of research explored in the literature, this methodology has
been designed to be transparent and easily reproducible. It begins with a discussion
of the hybrid development approach utilized to implement this embedded AI system.
Followed by the presentation of high-level system level architecture through block
diagrams and flowcharts, showing interaction of sensors, Edge processor, and flow of
information from acquisition to alert generation. The discussion then progresses to
explain in-depth rationale behind software design and hardware components and
software components such as dataset preparation, implementation, and fusion logic in
software design and development. Finally, there’s a discussion on comprehensive
testing and validation process that would measure system performance on these very
objectives.
The overall purpose of this chapter is to ensure that there is a comprehensive work
plan that explains effectively how the identified gaps in the literature regarding
modality, architecture, and context are to be met through technical implementation. By
writing the methodology in a rigorous and explicit manner, it is guaranteed that the
research process is systematic and capable of giving valid and reliable results.
33
3.2 Project Methodology Overview
This project adopts the V-Model (Verification and Validation Model) for Embedded
Systems Development. Unlike linear methodologies (such as Waterfall) or purely
software-centric approaches (such as Agile), the V-Model is specifically selected for
this research because it enforces a rigorous correspondence between the design of
the physical hardware and the verification of its intelligent software components. The
methodology is structured into three distinct phases that mirror the organization of this
report, ensuring that every engineering specification is systematically traced to a
validation result.
Phase 1: The Design Phase (The Left Side)
This phase focuses on the decomposition of the high-level problem into buildable
engineering specifications ("Going Down" the V-Model).
• Requirement Gathering (Chapter 1): The process begins with the definition of
the core problem—the need for proactive bullying detection—and the
establishment of the project's primary objectives.
• System Analysis (Chapter 2): Guided by the critical analysis of existing
technologies in the Literature Review, the system requirements are refined to
address specific gaps, such as the need for edge-based privacy.
• System & Module Design (Chapter 3): The requirements are translated into a
detailed system architecture. This involves selecting the hardware platform
(Raspberry Pi 5) and designing the software logic, including the specific AI
models (YOLOv8n) and the multimodal fusion algorithm.
Phase 2: Implementation (The Bottom - Execution)
This phase represents the realization of the design into a physical prototype (detailed
in Chapter 4).
• Hardware Integration: The physical assembly of sensors, the 3D-printed
enclosure, and the Raspberry Pi 5 computing unit.
34
• Software Coding: The translation of the design logic into executable Python
code, including the implementation of the inference engines, ring buffers, and
the MQTT alerting protocol.
Phase 3: The Verification & Validation Phase (The Right Side)
This phase systematically tests the system in ascending order of complexity ("Going
Up" the V-Model) to prove the design functions as intended.
• Unit & Integration Testing (Chapter 4): The individual software modules and
hardware interfaces are verified in isolation to ensure correct operation (e.g.,
verifying camera initialization and audio feature extraction).
• System Testing (Chapter 4): The fully integrated prototype is subjected to
comprehensive performance testing to measure key metrics such as detection
accuracy and system latency.
• Acceptance Testing (Chapter 5): Finally, the validated results are compared
against the initial research objectives defined in Phase 1 to conclude whether
the system successfully solves the stated problem.
By adhering to this V-Model framework, the research ensures a transparent and
traceable path from the initial conceptualization to the final validated prototype.
Figure 3.1: The V-Model Framework Adapted by the Author.
35
3.3 Proposed System Architecture
The proposed system architectures have been designed to implement the basic
functions associated with multimodal sensing, edge processing, real-time analysis, as
well as energy efficiency. The system architectures have been therefore designed with
a focus on a centralized edge host that facilitates data acquisition, analysis, as well as
data transmission. The system architectures have been designed utilizing a pipelining
approach that ensures each system module, such as acquisition, inference, fusion, or
notification, is distinctly separated. The system architectures have been therefore
encapsulated using two main diagrams, namely a hardware system architectures block
diagram, as illustrated in Figure 3.2, and a software operation flowchart, as illustrated
in Figure 3.3.
The hardware architecture, as presented in Figure 3.2, revolves around the Raspberry
Pi 5. The selection of Raspberry Pi 5 is valid because of its balanced processing power,
extensive IO capabilities, and feasibility of the cost, which is exactly what the
Architectural Feasibility Dilemma demands. The Pi 5 is connected to three major
sensors through dedicated channels: Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3 through the CSI2 port, which ensures best-in-class, latency-free videos; a USB Condenser Mic, which
enables digital audio recording capability; and the Passive Infrared (PIR) sensor (HCSR501) through the GPIO pin, acting as the low-power motion sensor. The Raspberry
Pi is supported through the 5V, 5A USB-C Power Adapter and shares the connection
through the Ethernet LAN cable to the school network. The alert is transmitted through
MQTT protocols. The sensitive information such as logs and videos is maintained
encrypted through the SQLCipher database stored in the microSD card of the Pi.
36
Figure 3.2: Hardware System Architecture Block Diagram by the Author
The logical flow of the software, shown in Figure 3.3, is controlled by a finite state
machine optimized for 24/7 running. After the initialization phase, the machine enters
a low-power mode Standby State, during which only the PIR sensor is continuously
polled. This is an essential aspect of energy savings. Upon detecting a movement, the
machine enters the Active State and activates the camera and microphone and starts
filling ring buffers with video and audio streams. Simultaneously, the core task of the
AI Inference & Fusion is processed: the vision model (YOLOv8n) analyzes each frame
to identify violent behavior, and the audio model analyzes 2-second snippets to identify
audio events. The outputs to the Fusion Score Calculation module are processed by a
weighted decision-level fusion algorithm to compute a combined threat level. If it
crosses a certain threshold, it triggers the Alerting Phase during which it performs the
following actions one by one: logs the occurrence in the encrypted database, saves a
record video, and broadcasts an MQTT message on the network. Then it goes back to
the standby state.
37
Figure 3.3:System Operational Flowchart by the Author
This unified architecture directly reflects the research aims. The multimodal sensor
fusion logic and multimodal sensor integration solve the Modality Completeness Tradeoff problem. The application of the local edge device for processing meets the
demands of the Architectural Feasibility Dilemma to fulfill privacy and low latency at
the same time. Finally, the programmability and flexibility of each software component
form the basis for the research aim of Contextual Validation to be accomplished.
38
3.4 Hardware Design & Implementation
Hardware design is the process through which the system architecture is mapped
to a hardware prototype that can be used for Functional Prototype Realization. This
discussion will highlight the criteria used to select the hardware that is collectively
responsible for ensuring compliance with the requirements for the Real-Time
Multimodal Processing System that is cost-effective and meets the privacy
requirements.
3.4.1 Component Selection and Justification
The choice of computer hardware components was made through careful
consideration based on system requirement specifications arising from the aims and
objectives of our study as a means of solving the Architectural Feasibility Dilemma.
Each selected component represents a compromise between performance, power,
compatibility, and market availability in Malaysia.
Figure 3.4: Raspberry Pi 5
• Edge Computing Host: Raspberry Pi 5 Model B (8GB RAM).
o Justification: Raspberry Pi 5 was chosen as a central processing unit
over other alternatives, which include NVIDIA Jetson Nano and Google
Coral Dev Board. Although NVIDIA’s parallel inference capabilities via
Jetson Nano are far superior, a Raspberry Pi 5 has a superior system on
chip performance that is essential in processing activities related to
sensor inputs, logic operations, and communication operations. The
major advantages include:
39
▪ I/O Versatility: A Camera Serial Interface (CSI-2) for high
bandwidth and low latency video, and several USB 3.0 ports for
high fidelity audio.
▪ Computational Adequacy: A quad-core ARM Cortex-A76
processor with 2.4GHz speed is adequately powerful to
simultaneously implement the optimized model for YOLOv8n and
the audio CNN model in real time.
▪ Cost and Ecosystem: It provides the strongest performance/cost
ratio and community engagement and documentation, which
helps in rapid prototyping and debugging.
▪ Future-proofing: The integration of the PCIe 2.0 interface makes
it easier to add accelerators specifically for neural networks in the
future (e.g., Hailo-8L).
Figure 3.5: Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3 (Wide Angle Lens)
• Vision Sensor: Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3 (Wide-Angle Lens).
o Justification: Selected for its natural compatability and optimized
performance with the Raspberry Pi platform. The main points are:
▪ CSI-2 Interface: This interface provides direct memory access
(DMA) capabilities, ensuring seamless video transmission to the
GPU or CPU, hence reducing latency and CPU overhead
associated with using USB cameras.
▪ Autofocus: Necessary in a corridor setup where the distance of
the subject may change.
▪ Form Factor: Small, lightweight, and easily mounted, with a wideangle lens suitable for covering a broad corridor sightline.
40
Figure 3.6: FIFINE K669B
• Audio Sensor: USB Condenser Microphone - FIFINE K669B.
o Justification: Use of a USB microphone over the analog microphone with
the ADC circuit was preferred for its simplicity, reliability, and sound
quality.
▪ Plug-and-Play Integration: No longer requires designing and
debugging an analog audio capturing circuit. It appears as a
standard USB audio device to Raspberry Pi.
▪ Sufficient Quality: Enables the recording of clear, directional
sound that can be used for the classification of speech and
acoustic events, given the nature of corridor acoustics.
▪ Noise Reduction: Most models come with a basic noise-reduction
system that enables the camera to separate the background noise
created by the environment and to helps isolate foreground
sounds.
41
Figure 3.7: HC-SR501 Passive Infrared (PIR) Motion Sensor.
• Trigger Sensor: HC-SR501 Passive Infrared (PIR) Motion Sensor.
o Justification: This sensor is essential for reaching the energy-efficient
state machine. It serves as a "wake-up" call, allowing the energyconsuming camera, microphone, and AI models to be enabled only if
required.
▪ Low Power: Draws very little current while detecting the presence
of the human body heat signal.
▪ Digital Output: This provides a simple GPIO-compatibile high/low
signal that is easy to poll when there is motion detected.
▪ Adjustable Sensitivity: Involves adjusting the sensitivity of the
detection range and period to correlate with the size of the
corridors.
42
Figure 3.8: Official Raspberry Pi 5 USB-C Power Supply (5V,5A).
• Power Supply: Official Raspberry Pi 5 USB-C Power Supply (5V,5A).
o Justification: A reliable and stable power source cannot be compromised
upon. When working with extreme CPU and GPU processing during dual
model inferencing, it’s imperative to have a stable power supply of 5V
and above 5A for a Raspberry Pi 5 board to avoid crashing and microSD
card corruption.
Figure 3. 9: Raspberry Pi 5 Heatsink and Active Cooler
• Raspberry Pi 5 Heatsink and Active Cooler
o Justification: The Raspberry Pi 5 runs computationally intensive tasks,
especially when it handles two models at once making the tendency to
be overheat by the process of it, without a good heat management such
as the heatsink and active cooler, it will help to dissipate the heat causing
the system to be smoothly and achieving the low latency promises.
o Purpose: To prevent performance loss during heavy processing.
43
Figure 3.10: SanDisk Extreme A2 (64GB)
• MicroSD Card (64GB+)
o Justification:
▪ Endurance: The system is always writing data to local storage, so
a "high endurance" card, such as SanDisk Extreme A2, is
required.
▪ Privacy & Security: It contains the SQLCipher encrypted
database, described as the “cornerstone of the system’s privacyby-design architecture”. This makes sure that the system does not
violate the privacy requirements by storing video and audio
information in their raw form.
o Purpose: To be the "Data Security Foundation" and to provide system
reliability.
44
3.4.2 Circuit Diagram
Figure 3.11: Completed Circuit Diagram
Based on the figure above, the completed circuit diagram shows how all the
hardware components will be connected to the Raspberry Pi 5 as the main edge
components completing the overall system.
3.5 Software Design & Algorithm Specifications
The software architecture implements the intelligence of the system, transforming
raw sensor data into actionable alerts. This development is structured into three core
streams: data preparation, algorithm implementation with fusion logic, and the user
alert interface. The design prioritizes efficiency for edge deployment, modularity for
testing, and robustness for reliable operation.
45
3.5.1 Multimodal Dataset Curation and Preparation
Another important challenge faced by machine learning involves the mismatch that
may occur between the training data sets and the context for which results need to be
applied. To specifically overcome the issue described as the Contextual Applicability
Void, as mentioned in Chapter 2, a combination of many data set approach is followed.
Figure 3.12: RWF2000 dataset example.
Figure 3.12 shows just a few of a so many video datasets that will be used to train
the vision model as a baseline for the initial training that will be adopted for the system.
It is a public, large video datasets containing 2000 clips that have two categories which
are violent and non-violent, the name, RWF-2000 which can be translated into “Real
world fight 2000”.
Figure 3.13: Crowd Sourced Emotional Multimodal Actors Dataset (CREMA-D) Waveform
46
For an audio baseline’s dataset, Crowd-sourced Emotional Multimodal Actors
shortform for CREMA-D will be used. Is a data set of 7,442 original clips from 91 actors.
The sentences were presented using one of six different emotions such as anger,
disgust, fear, happy neutral and sad. Also four different emotions levels (low, medium,
high, and unspecified) as seen on the waveform of figure 3.13.
Figure 3.14: AudioSet logo.
Another baseline dataset for the audio are AudioSet, which contains a large
collection of audio events. AudioSet consists of an expanding ontology of 632 audio
event classes and a collection of 2,084,320 human-labeled 10-second sound clips
drawn from YouTube videos.
For the system to be fully adapted with the Malaysian school corridor, a custom dataset
is developed:
1. Simulated Scenarios: Volunteers act out a scripted set of interactions in a
simulated environment that resembles a school. These scenes include not only
good examples (such as physical altercations, yelling) but also key negative
examples (such as play fighting, spirited discussion, shouting in celebration).
2. Data Capture: Simulations will be captured using the actual hardware that is in
the final prototype (Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3 and a USB mic).
3. Data Annotation: The video dataset has annotations consisting of bounding
boxes on individuals and action labels such as fighting, pushing, and neutral in
YOLO annotation format, while audio files are annotated based on event
classes such as aggressive shout, distressed cry, and so on.
47
4. Context-Specific Augmentation: To increase the generalizability of the model,
context-specific augmentations are applied to the dataset as follows:
o Visual: Color jitter for lighting variations, overlaying a simulation of school
uniform colors (blue and white) on the subjects, and blur effects to add
blur.
o Auditory: Adding background noise that simulates the corridors of a high
schooler at varying signal to noise ratios such as:
▪ people talking in the distance.
▪ footstep noise.
▪ noise of lockers opening.
This process enables the creation of a combined data set that ensures the basic
knowledge of the public data is critically adapted to the visual and acoustic environment
of the deployment.
3.5.2 Algorithm Development and Fusion Logic
The inference graph architecture is developed in Python with OpenCV for vision,
Librosa for audio processing (feature extraction) , and TensorFlow Lite for executing
the deep learning models. It features a modular graph architecture whereby the vision
and audio models run in parallel with a fusion model merging the outputs.
Figure 3.15: Yolov8 Logo
1. Visual Inference Engine: Figure above shows the Yolov8 logo, a representation
of the model family, YOLOv8n (nano) model is chosen, represents a smaller,
faster, and less computationally heavy model within that same family, finetuned with the prepared dataset,will be trained on the Pytorch framework,
exported to Tensorflow Lite, optimized for inference on the Raspberry Pi 5.
Within each frame, the model does two key task which are person detection
and pre-classification of action (fighting, throw) of the detected person. It
provides bounding boxes, classes, confidence values (𝐶𝑣) of the output.
48
Figure 3.16: Features extracted from speech signals (MFCC)
2. Audio Inference Engine: A lean 1D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), based
on the MobileNetV1D, has been developed in order to handle the spectrograms
of MFCC features of audio segments of length 2 seconds. It has been trained
to classify audio segments into appropriate classes concerning the
classification of aggression (e.g., aggressive, distressed, or neutral) and
provides a class and confidence level (𝐶𝑎). Figure above shows an example of
a features extracted denoted by time and MFCC coefficients.
3. Temporal Fusion Logic (Decision-Level): This logic represents the central
innovation that solves Modality-Completeness Trade-off. It supports a decisionlevel fusion:
a. Input Synchronization: A visual detection event with confidence 𝐶𝑣 at time
𝑡 triggers the fusion module to fetch an audio clip from a ring buffer
centered at time 𝑡.
b. Threat Score Calculation: A weighted sum called a composite threat
score (𝑆) is used:
[𝑆 = α𝐶𝑣 + β𝐶𝑎
]
where 𝛼 and 𝛽 are adaptable weights representing the respective
importance or weight of each modal. For example, 𝛽 could be set high in
cases where audio has been identified as a strong source for
disambiguation
c. Thresholding & Decision: A decision is then made on 𝑆 relative to a
threshold level (𝜏). If 𝑆 > 𝜏, then the system declares an incident of a
“high-risk bullying situation" and enters an alerting stage. This allows the
system to anticipate a level of risk through the gathering of correlations
in line with both senses.
49
3.5.3 System Interface and Alert Mechanism
Figure 3.17: Flask Logo
The user interface and notification system are designed with minimal impact and
maximum privacy in mind. A web dashboard, built using Flask as figure above logo
shows, allows viewing the system status, viewing previous notification instances with
anonymized thumbnails, and adjusting the sensitivity. The notification system, through
the fusion logic, adheres to a strict protocol for preserving user privacy:
1. Authenticated Local Logging: A secure SQLite database encrypts the encrypted
record via SQLCipher. The record contains only the metadata: a timestamp,
threat level (𝑆) computed, confidence in each individual modality (𝐶𝑣, 𝐶𝑎), and a
pseudonymous event ID without storing the video or audio files in the storage
drive.
2. Evidence Preservation: A video clip that consists of 10 seconds, along with 5
seconds before and after the trigger, is extracted from the ring buffer and saved
as an encrypted file on a local microSD card that can be accessed only from a
secured admin interface.
3. Network Alerting: A messaging action consisting of a JSON payload is
transmitted on the private MQTT topic (for example, “school/corridor_a/alerts”).
The constraints for size of a JSON payload are as follows:
{
"device_id": "corridor_a_cam01",
"timestamp": "2025-01-27T14:30:05Z",
"threat_score": 0.92,
"event_id": "encrypted_hash"
}
50
This near-instantaneous notification message will then be received by
authorized personnel such as teachers or security personnel running an MQTT
client app on their PC or smartphone. This enables nearly instantaneous alerts
and also crucially prevents the transfer of any personally identifiable information
on the network, since the raw data from the sensor never leaves the edge
device.
This comprehensive software design also implements the intelligent behaviors stated
in the research objectives, and it builds a system which perceives its environment in a
multi-modal manner and transmits its findings in a timely and secure fashion after
reasoning on the various threats detected by different sensors.
3.6 Testing and Validation Plan
The system will also undergo a thorough testing and verification procedure that will
ensure the system is functional and satisfies the requirements of the stated research
goals. To achieve traceability from component specifications to system verification, the
system will undergo testing based on the V-Model approach (Balaji & Murugaiyan,
2012). The system will undergo verification stages that will include the performance of
units up to the system’s deployment in simulated environments.
3.6.1 Functional Testing
The first level of validation will be carried out using functional testing to ensure that
each hardware and software element is functioning as required, both separately and
as part of a series. This is achieved through unit testing and integration testing. For
unit testing, individual software modules would be tested for independent validation. In
regard to the video pipeline, the initialization function would be tested for its capability
to properly acquire images at a resolution of 640x480 pixels with a frame rate of 15-20
frames per second, thereby verifying that the ring buffer system is working properly. At
the same time, for audio validation, functionality would be tested by verifying audio
stream integrity and proper computation of Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
(MFCCs) for feature extraction (Ittichaichareon et al., 2012).
51
The hardware interface for the PIR sensor will be evaluated for functionality by
ensuring the GPIO read function has switched to the correct state immediately after
the motion detection trigger has been activated. As for the artificial intelligence
modules, the YOLOv8n model (Jocher et al., 2023) as well as the CNN audio model
will be imported for evaluation purposes to ensure that both models are capable of
generating correct output based on sample input data. Moreover, data integrity as well
as data security will be evaluated using the database module, wherein test data
creation as well as read/write functionality will be performed on the SQLCipher
database to ensure that encryption protocols are working as expected. Lastly,
connectivity functionality will be evaluated using the MQTT client, wherein the
capability for the system to send test alert messages will be confirmed for successful
activation with the broker (Banks & Gupta, 2014).
Following unit verification, integration testing will be evaluating how modules interact
with each other. As part of this, it will be necessary to ensure that the wake-up signal
for the camera sensor, as well as the microphone sensor, is triggered successfully
when the system is idle. A key aspect of this testing will be evaluating the
synchronization between the video stream and the associated audio buffer. For testing
the software finite state machine, a complete pipeline will be tested, with all AI
inference removed. This will simulate a motion trigger, capture, simulated inference,
logic fusion, database logging, and MQTT alert notification, before the inclusion of the
AI model.
52
3.6.2 Performance Metrics and Evaluation
For evaluation, the integrated prototype will be measured for its performance on the
basis of quantitative parameters that are directly linked to the research aims. For
measuring the detection accuracy, a test dataset will be created by means of a
specially designed contextual dataset. The main parameters for evaluation will be
Precision, Recall, and F1-Score (Powers, 2011). The measure for achieving success
will be set at an F1-Score value of more than 0.85. The performance of the multimodal
system will be measured by comparing it to unimodal systems, such as vision-only and
audio-only systems, to determine the exact performance benefit achieved by the
sensor fusion logic.
The system efficiency will be evaluated under active state load to ensure real-time
relevance. The inference latency will be monitored through the average time taken to
analyze one video frame and two seconds of audio. Furthermore, the end-to-end alert
latency will be measured as the time taken from the end of the triggering activity to the
reception of the MQTT notification in the control center. This latency is set to be below
2 seconds. The system will be proven relevant to real-world deployment through its
resilience against non-violent, ambiguous behaviors like play-fighting or gesturing.
These behaviors will be employed to calculate the false positive rate per hour.
3.6.3 Validation Scenario and Testing Protocol
The last step in the plan is to verify the system as a whole in an environment that
simulates the target deployment context. A simulated corridor setting, such as in the
university hallways, would be chosen for the placement of the prototypes. Thirty
scripted scenarios would be enacted by volunteers, consisting of 15 positive scenarios
(representing physical and verbal aggression) and 15 negative scenarios (representing
ambiguous or innocuous interactions).
53
For evaluating the flexibility of the system, these scenarios would be performed with
different environmental variables such as lighting conditions (bright, normal, and
dimmed lighting) and background noise. Data would be collected by manually
recording ground truth. This would then be compared to the logs of the automated
system to determine accuracy and latency as defined.
3.6.4 Ethical Validation
Procedural validation will take place to check that the project complies with ethics
and privacy guidelines. A tight data handling policy will be enforced whereby all video
and audio recordings of simulation activities are encrypted and available on a 'need to
know' basis only. A data deletion plan will be set up towards the end of the project, and
the data carried in the MQTT payload will be checked to make sure that it does not
contain any Personally Identifiable Information.
Operational transparency will be maintained through documentation of system logic,
which will clearly differentiate its purpose as an anonymized alert system and not for
surveillance or identification purposes. Lastly, safety for simulation will always come
first, and all scripts used in simulating validation will be reviewed for safety among
participants, with "stop" signals added to avoid any chance of physical harm in enacting
aggressive scenes.
54
3.7 Project Timeline and Budget
Table 3.1: Gantt Chart FYP 1
FYP 1 W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12 W13 W14
Project Title
Literature Review
Progress Report
Project Proposal
Title Defense Presentation
Methodology
Chapter 1, 2, 3
Proposal Report
Table 3.2: Gantt Chart FYP 2
FYP 2 W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12 W13 W14
Project Progress with
Supervisor
Progress Report
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 1
Report Submission for
Supervisor Review
Report Submission for
Panel Review
Presentation &
Demonstration
Report Submission in
Hardcover
Planning is a critical phase in laying out a comprehensive roadmap for the project's
lifecycle. This phase includes research work, analysis of the context in which the
problem is situated, design of the proposed solution, identification of required hardware
and software for the project, and laying out the timeline for the project.
55
The Gantt chart is a critical tool in project timeline illustration and monitoring of project
progression in accordance with key project deadlines. As indicated in the above table,
the graph indicates the entire project schedule for both FYP 1 and FYP 2. This includes
the entire project development stages, right from project planning and prototyping,
through data analysis and discussions to project submission.
Table 3.3: Budget of the Project
No. Item Description Price (RM)
Devices (Existing Assets)
1 Laptop (Own) For system development, coding, and AI model 2,000.00
2 Smartphone / PC (Own) For receiving MQTT alerts and viewing the web 1,000.00
dashboard.
Hardware & Software Components
3 Raspberry Pi 5 (8GB) Central processing unit for real-time Edge AI inference. 480.00
4 Camera Module 3 Wide-angle visual sensor for corridor monitoring. 160.00
5 USB Condenser Mic High-fidelity audio input (e.g., FIFINE K669B). 130.00
6 HC-SR501 PIR Sensor Passive Infrared sensor for motion-based wake-up. 8.00
7 Power Supply (Own) 27W (5V/5A) USB-C power supply. 60.00
8 MicroSD Card (Own) 64GB+ High-endurance storage for OS and DB. 50.00
9 Active Cooler Thermal management solution for the SoC. 30.00
10 Enclosure Custom housing (Acrylic/PLA) for wall mounting. 40.00
11 Ethernet Cable (Own) Connectivity for local network MQTT alerts. 15.00
12 Software Libraries Python, OpenCV, PyTorch, SQLCipher (Open
Source).
0.00
TOTAL Project Cost (Excluding Owned Items) 848.00
This section describes the estimated cost for the project and the resources needed to
carry it out as planned, thus proving its viability in the constraints of an academic
research environment. The budget is divided into hardware costs, software/resource
costs, and contingency budget.
Subtotal(Devices) 3,000.00
Subtotal(Components) 973.00
56
3.8 Chapter Summary
This chapter has outlined a full and rigorous approach for the realization of the Edge
AI Multimodal Violence Detector that follows the V-Model (Verification and Validation
Model). The approach was developed taking into account the specific challenges of
the embedded AI system project that combines physical components, smart
algorithms, and strict ethical requirements in a fixed academic timeframe.
Together, this chapter presents a work plan that is transparent, reproducible, and
academically justifiable. This work plan ensures that the following implementation
(Chapter 4) on final year project 2 is carried out on the basis of this specification and
that the system to be developed can be validated. This completes the logic loop of the
V-Model directly to address the research gaps mentioned in Chapter 2. The basis
established now enables the transition from design to development.